In this lecture you're going to learn how to work with SQLite in Python.
SQLite is a very lightweight database that we use for storing data
on an application. It's often the technology of choice for
small applications like the apps that we run on phones and tablets. So it
allows us to easily store our data in a structure format with a table
of rows and columns. So let's start by importing
the sqlite3 module.
Now in the last lecture we created this movies.json file. So
let's go ahead, read all the movies from the json file and go ahead and store them
in our sqlite database. So, back
in applic py we should also import json
module, and from the path lib module we should import
the path class. Now,
we create the path object, to load movies
.json file, read all it's content,
this will give us a string, so we can pass that to json
.loads. And this will give us the list of
movies. Now, before going any further let's print
this movies object and see if everything is working.
up to this point. So let's run the application, beautiful,
so we have a list of dictionaries, alright now we're going
to store this list in a database, so
this sqlite object has a method called connect
we pass the name of our database file here,  let's call it db
.sqlite3 you could call it anything it doesn't matter.
Now if this file doesn't exist, this method will create it for us.
So, it will return a connection object,
this connection object, similar to files should be closed
when you're done with it. So a batter approach is to use
the with statement and then get the connection here.
Next we need to create a command, this command is basically
the structure we send to the database for creating data, updating data
deleting it and so on. Quite often we use a language called SQL,
thats beyond this scope of this course, so if you're not familiar with it, don't worry.
It's pretty easy to learn, in fact it's far easier then python, so
here's an example, I'm going to create a command and set it to a string
like this. inset into
movies I'm assuming we have a table called movies where we store
our movies. Then we add values
parenthesis, and in parenthesis I add three
question marks separated by a comma.
So this question marks our placeholders
for the values that we're going to supply in the next step, so our table of
movies will have three columns, id, title, and year.
So next we need to iterate over our movies list
that was pretty easy for movie in
movies now we need to execute this command,
so we use our connection object, this has a method called
execute, as the first argument we pass our command
and as a second argument we can pass the actual value.
So each movie object in this for loop is
a dictionary, it has key value pairs like id,
title, and year. All we want here is the actual year.
So, we call movie.values
now we need to get these values and put them
in the tuple, so we use a built in
tuple function like this.
So here we're iterating over our movies list, for each movie we execute
this command, when you're done we should call connection
.commit. At this point all these changes
will be written to the database, save the changes
now if we run this program we're going to get an error, so
there you go, operational error,
no such table movies. Because here  we're dealing with an
empty database this database doesn't have any tables so we need to create
a movies table first. Here in Google if we search for db
browser for sqlite. We will find this website,
sqlite browser.org, on this website we can find this application
to open a sqlite database and look at it's content. As you can
see on the right side we have executables for various operating systems,
so go ahead and download the right executable for your operating system
when you open db browser, you're going to see something like this,
so on the top, let's go to open database, here you're going to
project directory, let's open our database file,
there you go, so as you see we don't have any tables here. Let's go ahead and
create a table, we're going to call that movies,
and then we need to add three fields or three columns
so add field, the first one is id, the
type of this comment should be integer and we should mark this
as primary key, which means we're going to use the value of this column as
a unique identifier of each movie. We want to make sure each movie has
a unique id. Okay? Now let's add
another field, we're going to call title, the top of this column
should be text, and finally in another
field we're going to call it here, once again the type of this is going to be integer,
because here we're going to score values like 1984. So this
is how we create the table, as you can see that's pretty easy let's go ahead
okay, now on the list of tables we have this movies table
we expand it and see all it's columns, it looks like I
made a mistake here, so the name of my third column is Field3,
there so let's select the table with a modified table,
here, then rename this column
field to year. Now press tab to make sure changes
are (?) by the way you also have this column here,
if we tick these check boxes, we are telling Sqlite that the
data in this column cannot be null. In other words we cannot
have a movie without the title or without the year, so it's better to check this as
well we don't have to check not null for the id field because
when we select a column as the primary key, sqlite will make sure
that every row will have a value for that column. Alright let's go ahead
okay, were almost done, now we need to click
right changes beautiful, so, back
to our program, let's run it one more time, okay, this time we
didn't get an error, so back to db browser, now if you select the movies
table, and go to browse data, you can see both our movies at
end up here, they're stored in a structure format, so you have a table with
columns and rows, it's beautiful, now let me show you how to read data
from this database. So we don't need line 5 anymore,
because we are done with this json file. To read data from a database,
first we need to connect to it, so, we're going to keep line 5, but we're going to
change line 6, so instead of inserting a movie,
into the movies table, we're going to select all the movies.
The command that we should write is select star from
movies. Now, we don't need to iterate over the movies
object, we simply need to execute this command, so
connection.execute pass the command and this will return
a cursor, so when we read data from a database, we'll get a cursor.
Now store that here, the cursor is an iterable object, so,
we can iterate over it and get one row at a time, or row in
cursor let's simply print row, and we don't
need connection.commit because we only need this when writing data for database.
So delete, save the changes, run the program,
you can see in each iteration we get a tuple of the
values for a row in our database,
we also have this method so cursor.fetch
all. Now we return all the rows in this table in one
go. So here we'll get a list, let's call that movies,
and then print it on the terminal. Now if you run this for
we're not going to get any result, because after we iterate over this cursor,
we get to the end of the cursor, so we won't be able to read anything.
Do I'm gonna comment out these two lines, save the changes and
run the program, now as you see we get the list of titles.
So, this is the basics of working with sqlite databases,
in python, as I told you when working with databases, you should
be familiar with the sql programming language that is beyond the scope
of this course, but there are plenty of tutorials online and it's really easy
to learn.